# gatsby-transformer-mdx-introspection

This plugin statically analyzes the nodes generated by `gatsby-plugin-mdx` and generates GraphQL Nodes that allow users to find out what MDX-sourced pages contain which manually placed React components or automatically placed HTML elements.

It serves use cases that need the full "database" of "what component was placed where". For example, use cases where there is a need to generate links to component locations could use this plugin.

It supports the full MDX syntax, using the compiled intermediate JSX code to generate the component tree from. Complex attributes are represented as strings, while simple attributes generally get parsed correctly, which turned out to be sufficient for the typical use case.

## Install

```
npm install --save @commercetools-docs/gatsby-transformer-mdx-introspection
```

## How to use

Just add the plugin to the plugins array in your `gatsby-config.js`

```js
plugins: [`@commercetools-docs/gatsby-transformer-mdx-introspection`];
```

## Example GraphQL query

To collect all locations of manually placed `<ApiType .../>` components:

```graphql
query GetAllApiTypes {
  allComponentInMdx(filter: { component: { eq: "ApiType" } }) {
    nodes {
      component
      attributes {
        name
        value
      }
      mdx: parent {
        ... on Mdx {
          file: parent {
            ... on File {
              relativePath
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

### Example response:

```json
{
  "data": {
    "allComponentInMdx": {
      "nodes": [
        {
          "component": "ApiType",
          "attributes": [
            {
              "name": "apiKey",
              "value": "test"
            },
            {
              "name": "type",
              "value": "OutOfOrderPropertiesTestType"
            }
          ],
          "mdx": {
            "file": {
              "relativePath": "api/types/index.md"
            }
          }
        },
        ...
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

## Options

**`lowercaseIdentifiers`** [boolean] (optional, defaults to false)

Whether to have the `component` field (and `attribute.name`) be all lower case (legacy)

**`trimWhitespace`** [boolean] (optional, defaults to true)

Whether to trim leading/trailing whitespace in JSX snippets and string literals

**`collapseWhitespace`** [boolean] (optional, defaults to true)

Whether to collapse consecutive whitespace in JSX snippets and string literals

**`attachAST`** [boolean] (optional, defaults to false)

Whether to attach the original JSX AST nodes to the generated node output. Needed to query `ComponentInMdx.ast` successfully

**`removeMdxCompilationArtifacts`** [boolean] (optional, defaults to true)

Whether to remove attributes that are (usually) artifacts of MDX compilation (`mdxType` and `parentName`)

**`shouldIndexNode`** [(node) ⇒ boolean] (optional, defaults to () ⇒ true)

Predicate function used as a performance escape hatch to filter MDX files that get parsed/indexed. Use if not all MDX files need to be indexed and build times are prohibitive

**`excludeTags`** [array\<string>] (optional, defaults to [...])

JSX components that do not generate Gatsby nodes in the final output (they still appear as other components' children and their children can generate nodes)

##### Default value

By default, the following tags are exlcuded from node generation (generally due to being common or especially numerous):

- `p`
- `tr`
- `th`
- `td`
- `li`
- `span`
- `em`
- `strong`
- `del`
- `code`
- `MDXLayout`

## Advanced Queries

Each node exposes two fields, `childrenComponentInMdx` and `childComponentInMdx`, that both support filtering and sorting in addition to querying for `deep` children (children of children of any level). These fields allow for some advanced use cases:

```graphql
query GetAllLinksInHeaders {
  allComponentInMdx(
    filter: { component: { in: ["h1", "h2", "h3", "h4", "h5", "h6"] } }
  ) {
    nodes {
      childrenComponentInMdx(
        filter: { component: { in: ["Link", "a"] } }
        deep: true
      ) {
        component
        content
        attributes {
          name
          value
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

This query gets all link elements (both Gatsby links and normal anchor HTML elements) that are descendents of headers. If `deep` were `false`, then the query would only get link elements that are **direct** children of headers.

## Known issues

- The plugin has to parse the MDX separately (and therefore twice in the site build) because `gatsby-plugin-mdx` does lazyly evaluate the AST property on the Mdx GraphQL provided, which means it's available to components using GraphQL but not to other plugins that read from the GatsbyJS Node Objects in earlier build phases.
  - In addition, the plugin has to parse **all** of the MDX upon transforming because it generates Gatsby data nodes from the components, so it can't lazily parse the code like `gatsby-plugin-mdx`. Caching helps alleviate this problem, however.

### Differences between MDX and output

The plugin relies on the compiled JSX created by `@mdx-js/mdx` from the MDX source code, so the final representation may contain slight differences compared to the original MDX.

- Inline code blocks like \``code`\` turn into `inlineCode` elements in the final component tree due to [the MDX library](https://mdxjs.com/getting-started#working-with-components)
- The MDX library adds certain attributes to each HTML or React element it parses, namely, `mdxType` and `parentName`. By default, the plugin automatically removes all attributes that match these names. However, since there is no easy way to determine if these attributes were present in the original MDX file, the plugin will remove them too. This behavior can be disabled by setting `removeMdxCompilationArtifacts` to `false` in the plugin options
- Whitespace may end up different in text nodes than it was in the original MDX. The plugin attempts to clean up the text nodes it finds, but this can sometimes produce undesired output. Both trimming and collapsing can be disabled by setting `trimWhitespace` and `collapseWhitespace` to false in the plugin options, respectively
- Most complex javascript expressions are string-serialized in the final output, while simple literals (`boolean`/`number`/`null`/`undefined`/`string`) get parsed to their values
